- [**Thermomagnetic Curves**](../high_T_susceptibility.ipynb) This notebook plots and analyzes data from high-temperature susceptibility experiments.
**Nota bene:** We do not provide Curie Temperature estimation by the "two-tangent" method, as proposed for spontaneous magnetization  <span style="font-family: 'Times New Roman';">*M<sub>s</sub>(T)*</span> curves by [Grommé et al. (1969)](https://doi.org/10.1029/JB074i022p05277). [Fabian et al. (2013)](https://doi.org/10.1029/2012GC004440) explain this well:

_"The importance of the difference between determining <span style="font-family: 'Times New Roman';">*T<sub>c</sub>*</span> from <span style="font-family: 'Times New Roman';">M<sub>s</sub>(T)</span> and <span style="font-family: 'Times New Roman';">*$\chi$-T*</span> is pointed out by [Petrovský and Kapicka (2006)](https://doi.org/10.1029/2006JB004507), where methods to determine <span style="font-family: 'Times New Roman';">T<sub>c</sub></span> from measurements of the initial susceptibility are analyzed. They conclude that the two-tangent method is not suitable for <span style="font-family: 'Times New Roman';">*$\chi$-T*</span> and can considerably overestimate <span style="font-family: 'Times New Roman';">T<sub>c</sub></span>. The physical origin of  <span style="font-family: 'Times New Roman';">*$\chi$-T*</span> close to <span style="font-family: 'Times New Roman';">T<sub>c</sub></span> is more challenging than that of <span style="font-family: 'Times New Roman';">M<sub>s</sub>(T)</span>, because a number of low-field effects are important for <span style="font-family: 'Times New Roman';">*$\chi$-T*</span>, but become negligible in the higher fields used to infer <span style="font-family: 'Times New Roman';">M<sub>s</sub>(T)</span>. The variation of <span style="font-family: 'Times New Roman';">m</span> depends not only on the variation of <span style="font-family: 'Times New Roman';">M<sub>s</sub>(H,T)</span> with field  <span style="font-family: 'Times New Roman';">H</span>, it also contains a contribution from a rotation of the ordered moment with respect to an easy magnetization axis, and contributions from thermally activated switching of small independent – but already magnetically ordered – regions (e.g., SP particles). In large bulk material domain-wall movement contributes to <span style="font-family: 'Times New Roman';">*$\chi$-T*</span> even slightly below  <span style="font-family: 'Times New Roman';">Tc</span>. In nanoparticles the inhomogeneity of <span style="font-family: 'Times New Roman';">M<sub>s</sub></span>, due to the different exchangecoupling of inner and surface atoms, is of additional importance."_

And from [Petrovský and Kapicka (2006)](https://doi.org/10.1029/2006JB004507):

_"...susceptibility for T [to] <span style="font-family: 'Times New Roman';">*T<sub>c</sub>*</span> and T < <span style="font-family: 'Times New Roman';">*T<sub>c</sub>*</span> increases to infinity, and we have to use analytical formulas developed for susceptibility behavior above the Curie point. Here, due to the geometry of the susceptibility curve, the two-tangent method will always yield temperature above the inflection point, which is higher than the temperature at which the substance starts to obey the paramagnetic Curie-Weiss law. The resulting error in <span style="font-family: 'Times New Roman';">*T<sub>c</sub>*</span> (or <span style="font-family: 'Times New Roman';">T<sub>N</sub><sup>1</sup></span>) can be on the order of several degrees to several tens of degrees. Therefore, in the case of temperature dependence of magnetic susceptibility, application of the two-tangent method is not justified."_

Furthermore:

_"In the case of synthetic magnetite and hematite, with sharp Hopkinson peak, the difference between transition
temperatures determined using the two-tangent method and Curie-Weiss paramagnetic law is in the order of some few
degrees. In the case of samples with wide susceptibility maximum and gradual decrease, reflecting e.g., wide distribution
of grain sizes, or in the case of substituted hematite, application of the two-tangent method to susceptibility curves overestimates the transition temperature be several tens of degrees."_